Introduce support for Spring Data JPA repositories (#3489)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/spring-data-jpa-guide.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Using our Spring Data JPA compatibility layer

include::./attributes.adoc[]

While you are encouraged to use Hibernate Panache for Relational Database access, Quarkus provides a compatibility layer for
Spring Data JPA repositories in the form of the `spring-data-jpa` extension.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 1.8+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven 3.5.3+

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `using-spring-data-jpa` directory.

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \

>     -DprojectArtifactId=using-spring-data \

Author: Yes, you're right!

    -DclassName="org.acme.spring.data.jpa.FruitResource" \
    -Dpath="/greeting" \

>     -Dextensions="spring-data-jpa,jaxrs-json,quarkus-jdbc-postgresql"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -Dextensions="spring-data-jpa,jaxrs-json,quarkus-jdbc-postgresql"
```
I would point to the real extension for `jaxrs-json` because we could imagine having the tag on both the JSON-B and Jackson extensions and then it would fail.

Author: Makes sense. FWIW, I lifted this from the Panache guide so I guess it would need to be changed there as well

    private String color;

    public Fruit() {
    }

    public Fruit(String name, String color) {
        this.name = name;
        this.color = color;
    }

    public Long getId() {
        return id;
    }

    public void setId(Long id) {
        this.id = id;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return color;
    }

    public void setColor(String color) {
        this.color = color;
    }
}
----

== Configure database access properties

Add the following properties to `application.properties` to configure access to a local PostgreSQL.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.url=jdbc:postgresql:quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.driver=org.postgresql.Driver
quarkus.datasource.username=quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.password=quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.max-size=8
quarkus.datasource.min-size=2
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
----

This configuration assumes that PostgreSQL will be running locally.

A very easy way to accomplish that is by using the following docker command:

```

> docker run --ulimit memlock=-1:-1 -it --rm=true --memory-swappiness=0 --name quarkus_test -e POSTGRES_USER=quarkus_test -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=quarkus_test -e POSTGRES_DB=quarkus_test -p 5432:5432 postgres:10.5

Reviewer: Maybe use `11.5` instead?

Author: Again, I lifted this from the Panache guide, so perhaps we should stick with the same version for now and then update them all in a next step?

Reviewer: So, my advice would be to use the latest available when writing a new guide because you're testing it with a given version. You can still revisit the old guide later on.

Otherwise, you end up using the same old version on all guides.

Moreover, I don't think we need consistency given the users will use one or the other. But maybe Docker won't like it if you use the same instance name for another version? Considering you have `-rm=true`, I would expect this image to be short lived though.

Author: Fixed

```

> If you plan on using a different setup, please change  `application.properties` accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan on using a different setup, please change your `application.properties` accordingly.
```

== Prepare the data

To make it easier to showcase some capabilities of Spring Data JPA on Quarkus, we will ensure that the database contains some test data.
That is done by adding the following content to a new file named `src/main/resources/import.sql`:

[source,sql]
----
INSERT INTO fruit(id, name, color) VALUES (1, 'Cherry', 'Red');
INSERT INTO fruit(id, name, color) VALUES (2, 'Apple', 'Red');
INSERT INTO fruit(id, name, color) VALUES (3, 'Banana', 'Yellow');
INSERT INTO fruit(id, name, color) VALUES (4, 'Avocado', 'Green');
----

> Hibernate will execute these queries on application startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate ORM will execute these queries on application startup.
```

== Define the repository

> It is now time to define the repository we will use to access `Fruit`. Create a new interface like so:

Reviewer: I think it should be clearer that it's really standard Spring Data JPA.

Author: Does it sound better now?

import org.springframework.data.repository.CrudRepository;

import java.util.List;

public interface FruitRepository extends CrudRepository<Fruit, Long> {

    List<Fruit> findByColor(String color);
}
----

The `FruitRepository` above extends from Spring Data's `org.springframework.data.repository.CrudRepository` which means that all of the latter's methods are
available to `FruitRepository`.
Additionally we define `findByColor` whose purpose is to return all Fruit entities that match the specified color.

== Update the JAX-RS resource

With the repository in place, the next order of business is to update JAX-RS resource that will be use the `FruitRepository`. Open `FruitResource` and change its contents to:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.data.jpa;

import javax.ws.rs.DELETE;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.POST;
import javax.ws.rs.PUT;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.Optional;

@Path("/fruits")
public class FruitResource {

    private final FruitRepository fruitRepository;

    public FruitResource(FruitRepository fruitRepository) {

>         this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;

Author: I believe this is the syntax that developers used to Spring are by now very used to. We can change it of course if you still we should :)

>         this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;

Reviewer 2: Please, don't do this. This is based on fare assumption that developers may have used to it, but doesn't mean they like it. Think about kotlin default parameters in constructor. If I want to inject I want to tell it to container. But what if I don't want to Inject? Please let's keep java ee style and only take best parts of Spring. I really like that little `@Inject` annotation to tell what the dev intention is.

>         this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;

Author: I disagree on this. 
The use of `@Inject` on the constructor does not make any difference whatsoever when there is a single constructor and the class has been declared as a bean in any of the standard CDI ways.
Moreover, this is an extension meant to be used by folks familiar with Spring who are by now very used to this syntax and would most likely find it odd to have to use `@Inject` on the constructor

>         this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;

Reviewer 2: I agree for the case when app uses this "spring" compatibility layer, but for "normal" CDI case .. Hope Inject will be required.

>         this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;

Author: It is not required in Quarkus either, but most users coming from the JavaEE world will use it 😎

    }

    @GET
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Iterable<Fruit> all() {
        return fruitRepository.findAll();
    }

    @DELETE
    @Path("{id}")
    public void delete(@PathParam("id") long id) {
        fruitRepository.deleteById(id);
    }

    @POST
    @Path("/name/{name}/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Fruit create(@PathParam("name") String name, @PathParam("color") String color) {
        return fruitRepository.save(new Fruit(name, color));
    }

    @PUT
    @Path("/id/{id}/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Fruit changeColor(@PathParam("id") Long id, @PathParam("color") String newColor) {
        Optional<Fruit> optional = fruitRepository.findById(id);
        if (optional.isPresent()) {
            Fruit fruit = optional.get();
            fruit.setColor(newColor);
            return fruitRepository.save(fruit);
        }

        throw new IllegalArgumentException("No Fruit with id " + id + " exists");
    }

    @GET
    @Path("/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")

>     public List<Fruit> all(@PathParam("color") String color) {

Author: Changed to `findAll`

        return fruitRepository.findByColor(color);
    }
}

----

`FruitResource` now provides a few REST endpoints that can be used to perform CRUD operation on `Fruit`.

=== Note on Spring Web

The JAX-RS resource can also be substituted with a Spring Web controller as Quarkus supports REST endpoint definition using Spring controllers.

> See the link:spring-data-jpa-guide.html[Spring Web guide] for more details.

Reviewer: The link is incorrect.

== Update the test

> To test the capabilities of `FruitRepository`, go ahead and update the contents of `FruitResourceTest` to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test the capabilities of `FruitRepository`, go ahead and update the content of `FruitResourceTest` to:
```

        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Red")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body(
                        containsString("Apple"),
                        containsString("Strawberry")
                );

        //Find by color that matches
        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Green")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body("size()", is(1))
                .body(containsString("Avocado"));

        //Update color of Avocado
        given()
                .when().put("/fruits/id/4/color/Black")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body(containsString("Black"));

        //Find by color that Avocado now has
        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Black")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body("size()", is(1))
                .body(
                        containsString("Black"),
                        containsString("Avocado")
                );
    }

}
----

The test can be easily run by issuing: `./mvnw test`

== Package and run the application

> Quarkus dev mode works with the defined repositories just like any other Quarkus extension, greatly enhancing your productivity during the dev cycle.

Reviewer: Maybe add how to launch the dev mode?

You can of course create a native image using instructions similar to link:building-native-image-guide.html[this] guide.

== Supported Spring Data JPA functionality

Quarkus currently supports a subset of Spring Data JPA's features that we feel are the most useful and most commonly used.

An important part of this support is that all repository generation is done at build time thus ensuring that all supported features work correctly in native mode.
Moreover, developers know at build time whether or not their repository method names can be converted to proper JPQL queries.
This also means that if a method name indicates that a field should be used that is not part of the Entity, developers will get
the relevant error at build time.

=== What is supported

The following sections described the most important supported features of Spring Data JPA.

==== Automatic repository implementation generation

Interfaces that extend any of the following Spring Data repositories are automatically implemented:

* org.springframework.data.repository.Repository
* org.springframework.data.repository.CrudRepository
* org.springframework.data.repository.PagingAndSortingRepository

> * org.springframework.data.jpa.repository.JpaRepository

Reviewer: Maybe add backticks?

The generated repositories are also registered as beans so they can be injected into any other bean.
Furthermore the methods that update the database are automatically annotated with `@Transactional`.

==== Fine tuning of repository definition

> This allows user defined repository interfaces to cherry-pick methods from any of the supported Spring Data repository interfaces without having to extend those interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows user defined repository interfaces to cherry-pick methods from any of the supported Spring Data repository interfaces without having to extend those interfaces.
```

In such a case we would simply create `PersonRepository` like so:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.data.jpa;

import org.springframework.data.repository.Repository;

public class PersonRepository extends Repository<Person, Long> {

    Person save(Person entity);

    Optional<Person> findById(Person entity);
}
----

==== Customizing individual repositories using repository fragments

Repositories can be enriched with additional functionality or override the default implementation of methods of the supported Spring Data repositories.
This is best shown with an example.

A repository fragment is defined as so:

[source,java]
----
public interface PersonFragment {

    // custom findAll
    List<Person> findAll();

    void makeNameUpperCase(Person person);
}
----

The implementation of that fragment looks like this:

[source,java]
----
import java.util.List;

import org.springframework.stereotype.Component;

import io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.panache.runtime.JpaOperations;

@Component
public class PersonFragmentImpl implements PersonFragment {

    @Override
    public List<Person> findAll() {
        // do something here

>         return (List<Person>) JpaOperations.findAll(Person.class).list();

Reviewer: I find it a bit confusing you're using Panache here? Is it what you wanted to do?

Do we really need the cast btw?

Author: I wanted to showcase that fragment capability, which allows users to add custom functionality. If you would like me to do it using vanilla EntityManager, then I can certainly do it.
And yes, the cast seems to be necessary

    @Query("from Movie where title like concat('%', ?1, '%')")
    List<Object[]> someFieldsWithTitleLike(String title, Sort sort);

    @Modifying
    @Query("delete from Movie where rating = :rating")
    void deleteByRating(@Param("rating") String rating);

    @Modifying
    @Query("delete from Movie where title like concat('%', ?1, '%')")
    Long deleteByTitleLike(String title);

    @Modifying
    @Query("update Movie m set m.rating = :newName where m.rating = :oldName")
    int changeRatingToNewName(@Param("newName") String newName, @Param("oldName") String oldName);

    @Modifying
    @Query("update Movie set rating = null where title =?1")
    void setRatingToNullForTitle(String title);

    @Query("from Movie order by length(title)")
    Slice<Movie> orderByTitleLength(Pageable pageable);
}
----

All methods that are annotated with `@Modifying` will automatically be annotated with `@Transactional`.

==== More examples

An extensive list of examples can be seen in the `integration-tests/spring-data` directory which is located inside the Quarkus source code.

> === What is not currently supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== What is currently unsupported
```

> * Methods of the `org.springframework.data.repository.query.QueryByExampleExecutor` Interface - if any of these are invoked, a Runtime exception will be thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Methods of the `org.springframework.data.repository.query.QueryByExampleExecutor` interface - if any of these are invoked, a Runtime exception will be thrown.
```

* QueryDSL support. No attempt will be made to generate implementations of any of the QueryDSL related repositories.
* Customizing the base repository for all repository interfaces in the code base.

In Spring Data JPA this is done by registering a class that extends `org.springframework.data.jpa.repository.support.SimpleJpaRepository` however in Quarkus this class

> is not used at all (since all necessary plumbing is done at build time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not used at all (since all the necessary plumbing is done at build time).
```

We are exploring ways to provide similar functionality in the Quarkus support of Spring Data JPA.

> * `java.util.concurrent.Future` and related types are return types for methods.

Reviewer: It's not clear what's not supported here.

Author: Is it better now?

    -Dpath="/greeting" \
    -Dextensions="spring-data-jpa,resteasy-jsonb,quarkus-jdbc-postgresql"
----

This command generates a Maven project with a REST endpoint and imports the `spring-data-jpa` extension.

== Define the Entity

Throughout the course of this guide, the following JPA Entity will be used:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.data.jpa;

import javax.persistence.Entity;
import javax.persistence.GeneratedValue;
import javax.persistence.Id;

@Entity
public class Fruit {

    @Id
    @GeneratedValue
    private Long id;

    private String name;

    private String color;

    public Fruit() {
    }

    public Fruit(String name, String color) {
        this.name = name;
        this.color = color;
    }

    public Long getId() {
        return id;
    }

    public void setId(Long id) {
        this.id = id;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return color;
    }

    public void setColor(String color) {
        this.color = color;
    }
}
----

== Configure database access properties

> Add the following properties to `application.properties` to configure access to a local PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following properties to `application.properties` to configure access to a local PostgreSQL instance.
```
would be better, maybe?

Author: Yup

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.url=jdbc:postgresql:quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.driver=org.postgresql.Driver
quarkus.datasource.username=quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.password=quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.max-size=8
quarkus.datasource.min-size=2
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
----

This configuration assumes that PostgreSQL will be running locally.

> A very easy way to accomplish that is by using the following docker command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A very easy way to accomplish that is by using the following Docker command:
```

        this.fruitRepository = fruitRepository;
    }

    @GET
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Iterable<Fruit> findAll() {
        return fruitRepository.findAll();
    }

    @DELETE
    @Path("{id}")
    public void delete(@PathParam("id") long id) {
        fruitRepository.deleteById(id);
    }

    @POST
    @Path("/name/{name}/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Fruit create(@PathParam("name") String name, @PathParam("color") String color) {
        return fruitRepository.save(new Fruit(name, color));
    }

    @PUT
    @Path("/id/{id}/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    public Fruit changeColor(@PathParam("id") Long id, @PathParam("color") String newColor) {
        Optional<Fruit> optional = fruitRepository.findById(id);
        if (optional.isPresent()) {
            Fruit fruit = optional.get();
            fruit.setColor(newColor);
            return fruitRepository.save(fruit);
        }

        throw new IllegalArgumentException("No Fruit with id " + id + " exists");
    }

    @GET
    @Path("/color/{color}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    public List<Fruit> all(@PathParam("color") String color) {

>         return fruitRepository.findByColor(color);

Reviewer: So my comment was my more that you are not returning `all` fruits, you are searching by color. So I wonder why you name the method `all`.

Author: Right, my bad!

        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Red")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body(
                        containsString("Apple"),
                        containsString("Strawberry")
                );

        //Find by color that matches
        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Green")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body("size()", is(1))
                .body(containsString("Avocado"));

        //Update color of Avocado
        given()
                .when().put("/fruits/id/4/color/Black")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body(containsString("Black"));

        //Find by color that Avocado now has
        given()
                .when().get("/fruits/color/Black")
                .then()
                .statusCode(200)
                .body("size()", is(1))
                .body(
                        containsString("Black"),
                        containsString("Avocado")
                );
    }

}
----

The test can be easily run by issuing: `./mvnw test`

== Package and run the application

> Quarkus dev mode works with the defined repositories just like any other Quarkus extension, greatly enhancing your productivity during the dev cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quarkus dev mode works with the defined repositories just like with any other Quarkus extension, greatly enhancing your productivity during the dev cycle.
```

The application can be started in dev mode as usual using:

[source, bash]
----
./mvnw compile quarkus:dev
----

== Run the application as a native binary

> You can of course create a native image using instructions similar to link:building-native-image-guide.html[this] guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can of course create a native executable following the instructions of the link:building-native-image-guide.html[Building a native executable guide].
```

> == Supported Spring Data JPA functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Supported Spring Data JPA functionalities
```
or features if you prefer :)

    Movie findByTitle(String title);

    @Query("select m from Movie m where m.duration > :duration and m.rating = :rating")
    List<Movie> withRatingAndDurationLargerThan(@Param("duration") int duration, @Param("rating") String rating);

    @Query("from Movie where title like concat('%', ?1, '%')")
    List<Object[]> someFieldsWithTitleLike(String title, Sort sort);

    @Modifying
    @Query("delete from Movie where rating = :rating")
    void deleteByRating(@Param("rating") String rating);

    @Modifying
    @Query("delete from Movie where title like concat('%', ?1, '%')")
    Long deleteByTitleLike(String title);

    @Modifying
    @Query("update Movie m set m.rating = :newName where m.rating = :oldName")
    int changeRatingToNewName(@Param("newName") String newName, @Param("oldName") String oldName);

    @Modifying
    @Query("update Movie set rating = null where title =?1")
    void setRatingToNullForTitle(String title);

    @Query("from Movie order by length(title)")
    Slice<Movie> orderByTitleLength(Pageable pageable);
}
----

All methods that are annotated with `@Modifying` will automatically be annotated with `@Transactional`.

==== More examples

> An extensive list of examples can be seen in the `integration-tests/spring-data` directory which is located inside the Quarkus source code.

Reviewer: Maybe a link to the GitHub repo would be in order?

* Customizing the base repository for all repository interfaces in the code base.

In Spring Data JPA this is done by registering a class that extends `org.springframework.data.jpa.repository.support.SimpleJpaRepository` however in Quarkus this class
is not used at all (since all the necessary plumbing is done at build time). Similar support might be added to Quarkus in the future.

* Using `java.util.concurrent.Future` and classes that extend it as return types of repository methods.
* Native and named queries when using `@Query`

The Quarkus team is exploring various alternatives to bridging the gap between the JPA and Reactive worlds.

== Important Technical Note

Please note that the Spring support in Quarkus does not start a Spring Application Context nor are any Spring infrastructure classes run.
Spring classes and annotations are only used for reading metadata and / or are used as user code method return types or parameter types.

== More Spring guides

Quarkus support has more Spring compatibility features. See the following guides for more details:

* link:spring-di-guide.adoc[Spring DI]

> * link:spring-web-guide.adoc[Spring Web]

Reviewer: I would use the full name of the guides here.

[source,java]
----
import java.util.List;

import org.springframework.stereotype.Component;

import io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.panache.runtime.JpaOperations;

@Component
public class PersonFragmentImpl implements PersonFragment {

    @Override
    public List<Person> findAll() {
        // do something here
        return (List<Person>) JpaOperations.findAll(Person.class).list();
    }

    @Override
    public void makeNameUpperCase(Person person) {
        person.setName(person.getName().toUpperCase());
    }
}
----

Then the actual `PersonRepository` interface to be used would look like:

[source,java]
----
public interface PersonRepository extends JpaRepository<Person, Long>, PersonFragment {

}
----

==== Derived query methods

Methods of repository interfaces that follow the Spring Data conventions can be automatically implemented (unless they fall into one of the unsupported cases listed later on).
This means that methods like the following will all work:

[source,java]
----
public interface PersonRepository extends CrudRepository<Person, Long> {

    List<Person> findByName(String name);

    Person findByNameBySsn(String ssn);

>     Optional<Person> findByNameBySsn(String ssn);

Reviewer 3: `findByNameBySsn(String ssn)` already defined?

Author: Nice catch, fixed!
